!! PLEASE NOTE: This is currently beta software. Though stable, and
!! believed to be largely bug-free, its design and user interface are
!! still subject to change.


 * About This Program

Brain Jam is a solitaire card game. It is similar to soltaire games
like Freecell in that the entire deck is dealt out face up at the
start, so the player has full information. However, unlike many
solitaire programs, Brain Jam comes with a large but finite number of
initial orderings, all of which are guaranteed to be solvable. Thus
there is no luck factor in playing Brain Jam.

Once you have solved a given configuration, you can then  go back and
work to find a new solution with fewer moves.


 * Prerequisites

Brain Jam depends on the following libraries:

* ncursesw
* SDL2
* SDL2_ttf
* fontconfig
* zlib

In order to compile Brain Jam, you will need to have the include files
for the above libraries. For most Linux users, this means that you
will need to have installed the development versions of these
packages. For example, on a Debian-based system, you would run
something like:

  sudo apt install libsdl2-dev libsdl2-ttf-dev zlib1g-dev
                   libncursesw5-dev libfontconfig1-dev

Brain Jam can be configured to remove its dependency on some but not
all of the above libraries, at the expense of removing program
functionality. See the "Configuration" section below for details.

(In addition, the build process makes use of Python and the python
image library PIL, pkg-config, gzip, and sed.)


 * Configuration

There's no configure script at this time. But the code should be
portable to any system that supports the above dependencies. However,
you can manually edit the file "config.mk" in the top-level directory
before building to remove a couple of features of the program, in
order to avoid some library dependencies. Most users will have no need
to change these, but if for some reason you wish to avoid using these
libraries, the option is available.

If you remove the definition of "USE_NCURSES" in "config.mk", Brain
Jam will not link with the ncursesw library, at the expense of
removing support for the alternative text-based user interface.

If you remove the definition of "USE_SDL" in "config.mk", Brain Jam
will not link with the SDL2 libraries (nor zlib), at the expense of
removing support for the graphical user interface. Only the textual
interface will be available.

(And yes, you can disable both ncurses and SDL, but the resulting
program will not be useful.)

If you remove the definition of "USE_FONTCONFIG" in "config.mk", Brain
Jam will not link with the fontconfig library. In order to use the
graphical interface without libfontconfig, the program will need to
have a full pathname to a font file supplied. The path can be added to
the initialization file "brainjam.ini" (see below), with a line such
as:

  font=/usr/share/fonts/opentype/freefont/FreeSerif.otf

Alternately, the path can be hard-coded into the binary by editing
"sdl/getfont.c" before building. Hey, I don't judge.


 * Installing

Running "make install" with the necessary permissions will install the
brainjam executable under "/usr/local/games", and the man page under
"/usr/local/share/man/man6". There are no external data files
that the program requires access to in order to run.


 * How to Play

Brain Jam comes with its own documentation. You can type "?" or F1 at
any time while the program is running to switch to the help display.
The documentation is also available in "Help.txt" in the top-level
directory, for those who prefer to read plain text files.


 * Files

Brain Jam creates a directory "~/.brainjam" for storing your
individual settings and game state.

Two files in this directory are worth mentioning specifically. The
file "brainjam.ini" stores your current settings, such as the number
of the most recent game. The file "brainjam.sol" contains your best
solutions for each game you've completed. Note that these files
intentionally use the same filename and format as the original Windows
program. If you used this program, you should be able to copy your old
files over and have all of your existing solutions available in this
program.

The other files in this directory have names of the form "session-*",
and store undo history for each game.


 * Websites

The home page for this program is at:

  http://www.muppetlabs.com/~breadbox/software/brainjam.html

The website for the original Brain Jam program is at:

  http://brainjam.ca/brainjam/

From there you can obtain the original 16-bit Windows binary, as well
as play a variant version that runs in the browser.


 * License

Brain Jam is copyright 2017 by Brian Raiter. This program is free
software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of
the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version. This program is distributed in the hope that it will be
useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
General Public License, included in this distribution in the file
COPYING, for more details.


 * Credits

This program is written by Brian Raiter. The original game comes from
the Brain Jam program for Windows, which was written by Peter Liepa.

The rules of Brain Jam are based on "Baker's Game", as described by
Martin Gardner in the June 1968 issue of Scientific American.

The deck configurations were created by Peter Liepa with assistance
from Bert van Oortmarssen, and are used here with their permission.

The graphics that appear in Brain Jam (with the exception of the
original Brain Jam icon), are either taken from public domain sources,
or have been explicitly placed in the public domain by their creators.


 * Bugs

Bug reports are always appreciated, and can be sent to the author at
<breadbox@muppetlabs.com>.
